# Course Project

Please see the [MESA Marketplace](http://cococubed.asu.edu/mesa_market/index.html) for an extensive list of projects that have used MESA and related material (including inlists!).

## Past project topics and abstracts

### Effects of Initial Composition on Isochrones

The goal of this work was to explore the effect of initial composition on isochrones of single stellar populations (SSPs). Isochrone construction requires stellar evolution models for a wide range of masses that must then be interpolated. Our models were calculated with MESA, and interpolated using MIST. We explored two variations from "solar" composition (Y = 0.25, Z = 0.02): a Y = 0.27 variation and a Z = 0.03 variation. Unfortunately, our MESA stellar evolution models did not have enough time to encompass the full lifetimes of all ZAMS masses, so we are only able to present isochrones comprised of evolution up to helium burning. We find the highY SSP is has a consistently higher Teff that the highZ SSP. When comparing our highY isochrone to one of similar composition from Choi et al. (2016) our isochrone fails to capture a blue loop that appears from later evolutionary stages. Because of our isochrones' limited fidelity, we cannot say anything informative about the effects of stellar evolution model differences on the isochrones.

### A MESA Parametric Study of Stellar, Angular Momentum Transport

The transport of angular momentum in stars is vital in understanding various observational aspects of stellar evolution, like placement on the horizontal branch. This importance drives computational astrophysicists to more accurately account for angular momentum transport in numerical simulations, especially when it is treated as a diffusive process. Using the Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics, I evolve four zero age main sequence stars (1M⊙, 2M⊙, 5M⊙, & 10M⊙), while varying angular momentum transport diffusion coefficients. I track their evolution on the HR diagram and note how angular momentum transport promotes mixing in their envelopes, that produces a brighter subgiant phase. Likewise, the various transport instabilities dampen stellar rotation, thereby reducing mass loss on the outer edges of the star, and reducing rotational peaks within the helium core. The role of angular momentum transport therefore must be regarded as a partial contributor to the 'mass loss problem' and identified as one of the factors that influence where a star settles on the horizontal branch.

### CORE AND ENVELOPE MASSES OF POP III STARS AT CORE COLLAPSE

I discuss simulations of metal-free stars of masses from 40 - 60 M⊙. I look at the masses of the core and envelopes just prior to core collapse as a function of initial mass. The final mass of the silicon envelope is relatively independent of the initial mass while the final masses of the helium, carbon, and oxygen envelopes increase slightly with increasing initial mass. There appears to be a transition mass at about 45 M⊙ below which the envelope masses have a stronger dependence on initial mass and above which the dependence is weak. Above this transition mass, the helium-carbon, helium-oxygen, and helium-silicon mass ratios are all fairly independent of initial mass.

### EFFECTS OF INITIAL HELIUM ABUNDANCE ON POPULATION III STARS

Population III stars, or Pop III stars, are the hypothetical earliest stars. They are comprised almost entirely of hydrogen, helium, and lithium produced from big bang nucleosynthesis and devoid of metals. Consequently, their compositions should reflect the initial primordial abundances. The evolution of Pop III stars should be affected by the abundances of these elements due to their different molecular masses. These changes in their stellar evolution may affect observable quantities. In this work, I use the stellar evolution code MESA to model massive low metallicity Pop III stars with different initial masses and helium abundances. From the HR diagrams of these stars show that their luminosity L is related to their initial helium abundance Y following L ∝ exp (0.9Y ), although the resulting luminosity difference in Pop III is too small to feasibly constrain currently accepted estimates of Y. Although the models presented here failed to produce results that could be used to estimate chemical yields, future work using similar stellar evolution models could be used to inform metal enrichment in cosmological simulations.

### THE IMPACT OF NUCLEAR REACTION RATE UNCERTAINTIES ON SIMULATIONS OF CORE-COLLAPSE SUPERNOVA EXPLOSIONS

Core-collapse supernova (CCSN) explosion models are sensitive to the approximations made for various input physics. Nuclear reaction rates are adopted from experimentally measured values when possible, but much un- certainty remains for key nuclear reactions. The uncertainties in these reaction rates cna have a non-negligible impact on the products of the nucleosynthesis that takes places in CCSNe. This impact can lead to a decrement in our predictive capability in determining the progenitors of observed SNe. In this work, we look to quantify the variations imposed by the uncertainties of a few key reactions and their effect of properties of models of CCSN explosions. We use the open-source one-dimensional (1D) stellar evolution toolkit Modules for Experi- ments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA). Using a 13 M⊙ progenitor, evolved from pre-main sequence to the onset of stellar core-collapse, we follow the explosive nucleosynthesis using five models that vary the efficiency of two important nuclear reaction rates.

### The Effects of Rotation on High Mass Stars

Rotation in high mass stars can have a profound effect on their evolution. From re- ducing their effective surface gravity to inducing meridional circulation, rapid rotation alters the size and the chemical composition of high mass stars. Stars more massive than two solar masses have been known to rotate at ∼ 200 km s−1, but including ro- tation in stellar evolution modeling has been historically difficult due to the loss of spherical symmetry. Here, rotating and non-rotating stars ranging from 5 M⊙ to 50 M⊙ were simulated to study the degree to which rotation affects stellar evolution. Rotation noticeably alters the path a high mass will travel through the Hertzsprung-Russell Di- agram and increases the homogeneity of stars during their main sequence lifetimes. At this time, results remain largely qualitative, but it was found that rotation can increase the main sequence lifetime of a star from 5% to 35%.

### The Effect of Initial Mass on the Final O/Ne Shell Mass

The final mass of the O/Ne envelops in massive stars as a function of initial stellar mass was explored through a series of simulations using MESA, Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics. In Type II supernova, the p-process takes places in the O/Ne shell as the shockwave propagates. Initial masses of 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45 solar masses were examined with resulting O/Ne shell masses of 2.24, 3.88, 7.04, 2.45, 2.85 and 3.75 solar masses. There seems to be a peak in final O/Ne shell mass at an initial solar mass of 30; however, it is unclear if this is an artifact from the parameters or a real feature of the data. More work must be done on these simulations and furthering the scope of this study. Results and future works will be discussed.

### THE MASS RADIUS DISCREPANCY IN LOW-MASS MAIN SEQUENCE STARS: A COMPARITIVE STUDY

For decades there has been an unresolved disagreement between the observational and theoretical predictions of the mass-radius (hereafter MR) relationship in low-mass main-sequence stars. This long contested discrepancy has served as the driving force for the development of more accurate low-mass main sequence models. In order to obtain a robust theoretical understanding of how fundamental parameters (such as radii and effective temperatures Teff ) of low-mass stars are affected by choices of metallicity, mixing length parameter α we must systematically run models to converge on the physical mechanisms that contribute to the discrepancy. In this comparative study we present an analysis of low-mass (0.1M⊙- 1.25M⊙) main sequence stars evolved within MESA and compare those results to that of (Spada et al. 2013). We have found an agreement in the basic relationships between the parameters with the (Spada et al. 2013) paper, however, a more quantitative analysis of the models must be saved for future work due to the time sensitive nature of this project. We have also found that the mixing length parameter effects the MR relationship more than that of metallicity. To ideally constrain the discrepancy between theory and observation we would like to further investigate the most accurate observational measurements currently available.
